2022 STATE OF THE UNION ADDRESS President Joseph R. Biden Jr. March 1,
2022

Mr. Speaker, Madam Vice President, Members of Congress, the First Lady
of the United States, and the Second Gentleman of the United States:

Six days ago, Russia’s Vladimir Putin sought to shake the foundations of
the free world, thinking he could make it bend to his menacing ways. But
he badly miscalculated.

He thought he could roll into Ukraine and the world would roll over.
Instead, he met a wall of strength he never imagined.

He met the Ukrainian people.

From President Zelenskyy to every Ukrainian, their fearlessness, their
courage, their determination inspires the world.

Groups of citizens blocking tanks with their bodies. Everyone from
students to retirees, teachers turned soldiers defending their homeland.

In this struggle, as President Zelenskyy said in his speech to the
European Parliament, “Light will win over darkness.”

Let each of us here tonight in this Chamber send an unmistakable signal
to Ukraine and to the world.

Please rise if you are able and show that, yes, we the United States of
America stand with the Ukrainian people.

Throughout our history we’ve learned this lesson: When dictators do not
pay a price for their aggression, they cause more chaos. They keep
moving.

And the costs and threats to America and the world keep rising.

That’s why NATO was created—to secure peace and stability in Europe
after World War II.

The United States is a member along with 29 other nations.

It matters. American diplomacy matters. American resolve matters.

Putin’s war was premeditated and unprovoked. He rejected efforts at
diplomacy.

He thought the West and NATO wouldn’t respond. He thought he could
divide us here at home.

Putin was wrong.

We were ready.

Here is what we did:

We prepared extensively and carefully.

We spent months building a coalition of other freedom-loving nations
from Europe and the Americas to Asia and Africa to confront Putin.

I spent countless hours unifying our European allies.

We shared with the world in advance what we knew Putin was planning and
precisely how he would try to falsely justify his aggression.

We countered Russia’s lies with truth.

And now that he has acted, the free world is holding him accountable.

Along with 27 members of the European Union including France, Germany,
Italy, as well as countries like the United Kingdom, Canada, Japan,
Korea, Australia, New Zealand, and many others, even Switzerland.

We are inflicting pain on Russia and supporting the people of Ukraine.

Putin is now isolated from the world more than ever.

Together with our allies, we are right now enforcing powerful economic
sanctions.

We are cutting off Russia’s largest banks from the international
financial system.

Preventing Russia’s central bank from defending the Russian ruble.

Making Putin’s $630 billion “war fund” worthless.

We are choking off Russia’s access to technology that will sap its
economic strength and weaken its military for years to come.

Tonight, I say to the Russian oligarchs and corrupt leaders who have
bilked billions of dollars off this violent regime no more.

The United States Department of Justice is assembling a dedicated task
force to go after the crimes of Russian oligarchs.

We are joining with European allies to find and seize your yachts, your
luxury apartments, your private jets.

We are coming for your ill-begotten gains.

And tonight, I am announcing that we will join our allies in closing off
American airspace to all Russian flights—further isolating Russia and
adding additional squeeze on their economy.

He has no idea what’s coming.

That’s what we’re doing.

But let me be clear: Our forces are not engaged and will not engage in
conflict with Russian forces in Ukraine.

Our forces are not going to Europe to fight in Ukraine but to defend our
NATO Allies—in the event that Putin decides to keep moving west.

For that purpose, we’ve mobilized American ground forces, air squadrons,
and ship deployments to protect NATO countries including Poland,
Romania, Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia.

As I have made crystal clear, the United States and our Allies will
defend every inch of territory of NATO countries with the full force of
our collective power.

And we remain clear-eyed. The Ukrainians are fighting back with pure
courage.

But the next few days, weeks, months will be hard on them.

Putin has unleashed violence and chaos. But while he may make gains on
the battlefield, he will pay a continuing high price over the long run.

And a proud Ukrainian people, who have known 30 years of independence,
have repeatedly shown that they will not tolerate anyone who tries to
take their country backwards.

To all Americans, I will be honest with you: As we protect freedom, we
will bear some costs as well.

Putin’s war is already hurting American families at the gas pump.

Since Putin began his military buildup on Ukrainian borders, just since
then, the price of gas in America went up 75 cents.

And with this action, it’s going to go up further.

I’m going to do everything I can to minimize Putin’s price hike here at
home.

We are coordinating with major oil-producing countries to release 60
million barrels of oil from reserves around the world. America will lead
that effort, releasing 30 million barrels from our own Strategic
Petroleum Reserve.

And we stand ready to do more if necessary, unified with our allies.

These steps will help blunt gas prices here at home.

And I know the news about what’s happening can seem alarming.

But I want you to know that we are going to be okay.

When the history of this era is written, Putin’s war on Ukraine will
have left Russia weaker and the rest of the world stronger.

While it shouldn’t have taken something so terrible for people around
the world to see what’s at stake, now everyone sees it clearly.

We see the unity among leaders of nations and a more unified Europe, a
more unified West.

And we see unity among the people who are gathering in cities in large
crowds around the world—even in Russia—to demonstrate their support for
Ukraine.

In the battle between democracy and autocracy, democracies are rising to
the moment.

And the world is clearly choosing the side of peace and security.

This is a real test. It’s going to take time.

So let us continue to draw inspiration from the iron will of the
Ukrainian people.

To our fellow Ukrainian Americans who forge a deep bond that connects
our two nations, we stand with you.

Putin may circle Kyiv with tanks, but he’ll never gain the hearts and
souls of the Ukrainian people.

He’ll never extinguish their love of freedom.

He will never weaken the resolve of the free world.

We meet tonight in an America that has lived through two of the hardest
years this nation has ever faced.

The pandemic has been punishing.

And so many families are living paycheck to paycheck, struggling to keep
up with the rising costs of food, gas, housing, and so much more.

I understand.

I remember when my Dad had to leave his home in Scranton, Pennsylvania,
to find work.

I grew up in a family where if the price of food went up, you felt it.

That’s why one of the first things I did as President was fight to pass
the American Rescue Plan.

Because people were hurting.

We needed to act, and we did.

Few pieces of legislation have done more at a critical moment in our
history to lift us out of crisis.

It fueled our effort to vaccinate the nation and combat COVID-19.

It delivered immediate economic relief for tens of millions of
Americans.

Helped put food on their table, keep a roof over their heads, and cut
the cost of health insurance.

And as my Dad used to say, it gave people a little breathing room.

Unlike the $2 trillion tax cut passed in the previous administration
that benefited the top 1% of Americans, the American Rescue Plan helped
working people—and left no one behind.

And it worked.

It created jobs. Lots of jobs.

In fact, our economy created over 6.5 million new jobs just last year,
more jobs created in one year than ever before in the history of
America.

Our economy grew at a rate of 5.7% last year, the strongest growth in
nearly 40 years.

The unemployment rate dropped to 3.9%.

More Americans are working than ever before.

And we made historic investments in rebuilding America.

But I know there’s more to do.

Inflation is robbing families of their gains.

That’s why my top priority is getting prices under control.

We have a choice.

One way to fight inflation is to drive down wages and make Americans
poorer.

I have a better plan to fight inflation.

Lower your costs, not your wages.

Make more cars and semiconductors in America.

More infrastructure and innovation in America.

More goods moving faster and cheaper in America.

More jobs where you can earn a good living in America.

And instead of relying on foreign supply chains, let’s make it in
America.

Economists call it “increasing the productive capacity of our economy.”

I call it building a better America.

My plan to fight inflation will lower your costs and lower the deficit.

The 17 Nobel laureates in economics said my plan will ease long-term
inflationary pressures.

Top business leaders and most Americans support the plan.

And here’s the plan:

First, fix the supply chain.

Cut the cost of prescription drugs.

Cut energy costs for families an average of $500 a year by combating
climate change.

Cut the deficit by making the wealthy and corporations pay their fair
share.

And finally, promote competition so consumers get a better deal.

That’s my plan.

And I’m going to keep fighting for it.

My fellow Americans, the State of the Union is strong—because you, the
American people, are strong.

We are stronger today than we were a year ago.

And we will be stronger a year from now than we are today.

This is the United States of America.

There is nothing beyond our capacity.

We are the only nation on Earth that has always turned every crisis we
have faced into an opportunity.

So let’s not just talk about the State of the Union.

Let’s make it better.

May God bless you all. And may God protect our troops.
